What do cross-country road trips, wedding speeches, and social media marketing have in common? Planning. I definitely can’t help you with your road trip or wedding speech (sorry), but I can help you create a social media content calendar to organize your next marketing campaign.
As marketers, we recognize that social media is integral to an effective inbound marketing strategy. With so many social networks available to us, staying organized and planning for when and what we share is crucial. This is exactly where a social media calendar enters the picture.
Before we dive into our list of top tools to stay organized, here's what you need to know about social media calendars and why they're essential.
Table of Contents
- What is a social media calendar?
- Benefits of Using a Social Media Content Calendar & Content Planner
- How to Create a Social Media Calendar
- Social Media Templates
- Social Media Calendar Examples
- Social Media Content Calendar Tools to Plan Your Messaging
- How To Create a Social Media Posting Schedule for Your Business
- How To Create a Content Calendar
Free Social Media Content Calendar Template
Download the free template and user guide to manage your social media posts and strategy.
- Coordinate campaigns
- Increase your reach
- Measure engagement
- Plan your posts
Download Free
All fields are required.
Form not available
What is a social media calendar?
A social media content calendar is a rundown of your upcoming posts organized by date and time. A social media calendar can be a spreadsheet (HubSpot offers a free one that you can download here), digital calendar, or interactive dashboard.
Benefits of Using a Social Media Content Calendar & Content Planner
A successful social media strategy requires regular publishing and engaging with followers to see positive results — whether you're looking for sales, brand recognition, lead generation, or all three.
If you're not already using a social media content planner, here are a few advantages to pique your interest.
Easily pivot when plans change.
Plan out posts for entire weeks or months in advance, freeing up your working hours to strategize for the future. This spares you from spending valuable time searching the internet daily for content to share, a known productivity killer.
Curate content just for your audience (on each platform).
Audiences expect to see something different on TikTok, LinkedIn, YouTube, etc. That's why I recommend that all social media marketers take the time to craft custom messages for each network.
A good calendar will help guide you through this process. Our free social planner has tabs for each platform and is already programmed for each platform.
For example, your Instagram followers want to see Reels, while your X (previously Twitter) followers like quick sound bites and shareable quotes.
Planning this content using a social media content planner will save you time and make drafting thoughtful and intentional content for each platform easier.
Improved collaboration.
A shared calendar can improve collaboration with internal teams and external stakeholders. Skip sending last-minute emails for links, project status, or partnerships.
Your social content planner gives you a simple way to let everyone know what you'll need well before you need it.
Simplified performance tracking.
Content planning with a calendar helps you track impact and ROI for social media efforts. With a calendar, you analyze which content performed best to adjust your strategy accordingly.
If a particular type of post received significant views, you can recreate it for a different topic and potentially see the same success.
Some calendar tools come incredible with built-in performance tracking, like Later:
Reach new audiences.
With the help of a content planner, you can plan for holidays, events, and observance days, such as National Cat Day or Eat More Fruits and Vegetables Day.
This makes it easy for you to tailor your content and engage with a broader audience.
How to Create a Social Media Calendar
To create an effective social media calendar, you should:
1. Conduct a social media audit.
A social media audit assesses your social media presence, accounts, and engagement. In my experience, an audit is about more than just analyzing your social media performance.
It helps you better understand your target audience's interests, habits, and expectations and gives you crucial clues about how they engage with your content.
Plus, it keeps you in touch with new social media trends, tools, and features.
As you complete your audit, be sure to review:
- Engagement rate.
- Conversion rate.
- Click-through rate.
- Reach.
- Impressions.
You can use these metrics across all your social accounts to draw conclusions and adjust your social media calendar from there. Seek to uncover patterns and understand what makes certain content perform better than the other posts.
Most platforms help you identify your top-performing content with their own built-in analy